DOC-13717 rest api for app telemetry (#4088)
couchbase/docs-server: modules/rest-api/pages/application-telemetry.adoc

Couchbase Server reports the collected telemetry data through the same Prometheus metrics endpoint it uses to publish its own metrics.
See xref:manage:monitor/set-up-prometheus-for-monitoring.adoc[] to learn how to set up Prometheus to collect metrics from your Couchbase Server cluster.

NOTE: A Couchbase Server cluster only supports application telemetry when all of its nodes are running version 8.0 or later. 
Earlier versions of Couchbase Server do not support application telemetry.
You cannot have the cluster collect application telemetry if the cluster is running in mixed mode with some nodes running a version earlier than 8.0.
If you enable application telemetry on a cluster running in mixed mode with pre-8.0 nodes, the cluster does not advertise its ability to collect telemetry to clients.

== HTTP Methods 

This API endpoint supports the following methods:

* <<#get-status>>
* <<#configure-telemetry>>

[#get-status]
== Get Application Telemetry Status

The following method gets the current state of application telemetry for the cluster.

----
GET /settings/appTelemetry
----

=== curl Syntax

[source,bash]
----
curl -sS -u $USER:$PASSWORD \

>      -X GET 'http[s]://{host}:{port}/settings/appTelemetry' 

Author: For what it's worth, we're making {host} and {port} the standard for these placeholdsers going forward.

By sending a POST request to the `/settings/appTelemetry` endpoint, you can:

* Enable or turn off application telemetry.
* Set the limit on the number of clients a single node can scrape telemetry data from at the same time.
* Set how often the nodes scrape telemetry data from clients.

.Configure Application Telemetry
----
POST /settings/appTelemetry
----

=== curl Syntax

[source,bash]
----
curl -sS -u $USER:$PASSWORD \
  -X POST http://{host}:{port}/settings/encryptionKeys \
  [-d enabled=[true|false]] \
  [-d maxScrapeClientsPerNode=<integer>] \
  [-d scrapeIntervalSeconds=<integer>]
----

.Path and curl Parameters
:priv-link: config-privs
include::partial$user-pw-host-port-params.adoc[]

.REST Parameters
`enabled` (boolean, optional)::
Set to `true` to enable application telemetry or `false` to disable it.

`maxScrapeClientsPerNode` (integer, optional)::
Set the maximum number of clients from which a single node can scrape telemetry data at the same time.
If the number of client telemetry connections reaches this threshold, the node rejects new telemetry connections until the number of connect clients drops.

+
Valid values are from `1` to `1024`. 

+

> The default value is `1024`.

Reviewer: Are there any sentinel values like `0` which indicate unlimited?

How would a user know when the limit is being hit?  

@avsej or @timofey-barmin may know this off the top of their heads.

Author: According to the [dev PR](https://review.couchbase.org/c/ns_server/+/221739) the lower limit is 1.

Author: Also, attempting to set the value to 0 results in an error sating the range is 1 to 1024.

`200 OK`::
Returned when the call is successful.
A successful call also returns a JSON object with the new application telemetry settings.
This object has the same format as the <<#get-status-responses,response from the GET method>>.

`403 Forbidden`::
Returned if you do not have the proper roles to call this API.
See <<#config-privs>> for a list of the required roles.

[#config-examples]
=== Examples

The following example enables telemetry, sets the maximum number of clients a node can scrape telemetry data from at the same time to `512`, and sets the scrape interval to `90` seconds.
It pipes the result through `jq` to make it easier to read.

[source,bash]
----
curl -X POST -u Administrator:password \
     http://localhost:8091/settings/appTelemetry \
     -d enabled=true \
     -d maxScrapeClientsPerNode=512 \
     -d scrapeIntervalSeconds=90 | jq
----

If successful, the previous command returns the following JSON object containing the new state of application telemetry for the cluster:

[source,json]
----
{
  "enabled": true,
  "maxScrapeClientsPerNode": 512,
  "scrapeIntervalSeconds": 90
}
----

== See Also

* xref:manage:monitor/set-up-prometheus-for-monitoring.adoc[]

> * See the SDK Telemetry from the Server section of the Collecting Information and Logging page in the documentation for the SDK you use.

Reviewer: Somewhere in here we should mention the SDK-API level required to get AppTelemetry from the SDK.  @RichardSmedley might have a good way to communicate this. 

To get details, most users will need to update both their SDK, and the cluster, and enable it.  As currently written, the SDK side requirement is possibly missed. 

Another requirement which we may want to mention is that this feature requires the management port to be exposed from cluster to client (typically port 8091/18091, but can be different with alt-address).

Author: I've added a section on prerequisites. I added the SDK API lvel requirements and linked to the SDK page that lists which versions of the SDK implement that API version. I also added the port availability requirement.

:page-topic-type: reference
:page-toclevels: 3

[abstract]
{description}

== Description

Having Couchbase Server collect telemetry from your applications can help you troubleshoot client issues.
This telemetry data is useful to diagnose issues such as poor performance or timeouts.

When you enable application telemetry, Couchbase Server advertises to SDK clients that it can collect telemetry data.
When an SDK client connects to a cluster with application telemetry enabled, it opens a WebSocket connection to a node in the cluster.
Couchbase Server uses this connection to periodically gather telemetry data from the client in Prometheus format.

NOTE: Application telemetry is off by default in Couchbase Server 8.0.
Future versions of Couchbase Server may enable it by default.

Couchbase Server reports the telemetry data it collects through the same Prometheus metrics endpoint it uses to publish its own metrics.
See xref:manage:monitor/set-up-prometheus-for-monitoring.adoc[] to learn how to set up Prometheus to collect metrics from your Couchbase Server cluster.

=== Prerequisites

> You Couchbase Server cluster and your clients must meet the following requirements to use application telemetry:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your Couchbase Server cluster and your clients must meet the following requirements to use application telemetry:
```

* A Couchbase Server cluster only supports application telemetry when all of its nodes are running version 8.0 or later. 
Earlier versions of Couchbase Server do not support application telemetry.
Your cluster cannot collect application telemetry if it's running in mixed mode where some nodes are running a pre-8.0 version.

> If you enable application telemetry on a mixed-mode cluster with pre-8.0 nodes, it does not advertise to clients that it can collect telemetry.

Reviewer 2: What is this referring to? You can't configure app telemetry on a mixed-mode cluster

Author: OK, so the REST API returns an error if you attempt to enable it in mixed mode?

Reviewer 2: That's correct. On the 8.0 node(s) it returns error 400 "This http API endpoint isn't supported in mixed version clusters". On the pre-8.0 node(s) it returns error 404

Author: Thanks. I've added those responses and stated you cannot enable it in mixed mode with pre-8.0 nodes.

* Your applications must use an SDK that implements version 3.8 or later of the SDK API.
See the table in xref:java-sdk:project-docs:compatibility.adoc#api-version[API Version] to determine which version of the SDK your application uses implements version 3.8 of the SDK API.

* Your clients must be able to connect to the node's management port to create the WebSocket connection for telemetry data collection.
The default management port is 8091 for unencrypted connections and 18901 for encrypted connections.
Make sure any firewall rules between your clients and the nodes allow traffic on the management port.

== HTTP Methods 

This API endpoint supports the following methods:

* <<#get-status>>
* <<#configure-telemetry>>

[#get-status]
== Get Application Telemetry Status

> The following method gets the current state of application telemetry for the cluster.

Reviewer 2: Do we normally refer to settings as "state"? Feels like it suggests it would be a status, rather than the configuration

Reviewer 2: I think you misread my comment here. I meant that "state" sounds like a status, not that that is a better way of referring to it. Settings are definitely not a "status" or a "state" in my mind

[source,bash]
----
curl -sS -u $USER:$PASSWORD \
  -X POST http://{host}:{port}/settings/appTelemetry \
  [-d enabled=[true|false]] \
  [-d maxScrapeClientsPerNode=<integer>] \
  [-d scrapeIntervalSeconds=<integer>]
----

.Path and curl Parameters
:priv-link: config-privs
include::partial$user-pw-host-port-params.adoc[]

.REST Parameters
`enabled` (boolean, optional)::
Set to `true` to enable application telemetry or `false` to turn it off.

+ 
Defaults to `false` (off).
When you enable application telemetry, Couchbase Server advertises to SDK clients that it can collect telemetry data.

+
NOTE: Future versions of Couchbase Sever may enable application telemetry by default.

`maxScrapeClientsPerNode` (integer, optional)::
Sets the maximum number of clients a single node can scrape telemetry data from at the same time.
If the number of client telemetry connections reaches this threshold, the node rejects new telemetry connections until the number of connected clients drops.

+
Valid values are from `1` to `1024`. 

+
The default value is `1024`.
You can set `maxScrapeClientsPerNode` to a lower value to reduce potential overhead on your nodes from collecting telemetry data.

> However, lowering it too far could result in clients being unable to find a node for their telemetry connection. 

Reviewer 2: > lower value to reduce potential overhead

> lowering it too far could result in clients being unable to find a node

Feels like basically saying "lower value reduces number of clients, but lowering it too far could result in reducing the number of clients".  Like, the whole point is to reduce the number of clients, so the two statements don't really feel consistent with each other.

```suggestion
You can set `maxScrapeClientsPerNode` to a lower value to reduce potential overhead on your nodes from collecting telemetry data by preventing too many clients connecting to each node.
However, if the limit is reached on all nodes, this will result in any additional clients being unable to find a node for their telemetry connection. 
```

Author: I'v reworded a bit differently and also added in a mention of the metric admins can use to monitor the number of connections.

When clients cannot find a node to connect to, Couchbase Server cannot collect their telemetry data. 

`scrapeIntervalSeconds` (integer, optional)::
Sets how often the nodes scrape telemetry data from clients in seconds.

+
Valid values are `60` to `600`.

+
The default value is `60`.
You can increase this value to reduce the overhead of collecting telemetry data on your nodes.

> However, setting it too high could result in a loss of telemetry data when clients close their connections.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean?

Author: I assume that if you set `scrapeIntervalSeconds` to a larger value (say the maximum of 10 minutes), you  increase the chances that the client will disconnect before the node can scrape it. I'm not sure if that makes a difference or not. Could there be cases where a client gives up and disconnects if it gets repeated timeouts? If so, a longer scrape interval increases the chances those timeouts would not be scraped from the client before it disconnects?

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see what you mean. Short-lived connections will be less likely to get scraped, certainly.

I can't speak to the behaviour of SDKs when they get timeouts, but I would guess that it depends on the application configuration.

Short-lived connections will generally not get well represented in the telemetry data, and if the interval is increased then they will be even less well represented.

Author: I've cleaned up the explanation a bit and also gave an example of why Server would lose more telemetry when the value is set high.

This object has the same format as the <<#get-status-responses,response from the GET method>>.

`403 Forbidden`::
Returned if you do not have the proper roles to call this API.
See <<#config-privs>> for a list of the required roles.

[#config-examples]
=== Examples

The following example enables telemetry, limits the node to scraping data from  `512` clients, and sets the scrape interval to `90` seconds.
It pipes the result through `jq` to make it easier to read.

[source,bash]
----
curl -X POST -u Administrator:password \
     http://localhost:8091/settings/appTelemetry \
     -d enabled=true \
     -d maxScrapeClientsPerNode=512 \
     -d scrapeIntervalSeconds=90 | jq
----

If successful, the previous command returns the following JSON object containing the new state of application telemetry for the cluster:

[source,json]
----
{
  "enabled": true,
  "maxScrapeClientsPerNode": 512,
  "scrapeIntervalSeconds": 90
}
----

== See Also

* xref:manage:monitor/set-up-prometheus-for-monitoring.adoc[]

* See the SDK Telemetry from the Server section of the Collecting Information and Logging page in the documentation for the SDK you use.
For example:

> ** xref:cxx-sdk:howtos:collecting-information-and-logging.adoc#sdk-telemetry-from-the-server[C++ SDK]

Reviewer 3: See line 34 comments (and note the use of a single line for 12 SDK links in the linked docs page).

Author: Here I'm just linking to the SDKs where I have found the Collecting Information and Logging topic which discusses application telemetry. It looks like nt all SDKs offer this topic.

| xref:dotnet-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[.NET]    
| 3.8  

| xref:cxx-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[{cpp}]      
| 1.2  

| xref:go-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Go]          
| 2.11 

| xref:java-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Java]      
| 3.9  

| xref:kotlin-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Kotlin]  
| 3.9  

| xref:nodejs-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Node.js] 
| 4.6   

| xref:php-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[PHP]       
| 4.4  

| xref:python-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Python]  
| 4.5  

| xref:ruby-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Ruby]      
| 3.7  

| xref:scala-sdk:hello-world:overview.adoc[Scala]    
| 3.9  
|===

* Your clients must be able to connect to the node's management port to create the WebSocket connection for telemetry data collection.
The default management port is 8091 for unencrypted connections and 18901 for encrypted connections.
Make sure any firewall rules between your clients and the nodes allow traffic on the management port.

== HTTP Methods 

This API endpoint supports the following methods:

* <<#get-status>>
* <<#configure-telemetry>>

[#get-status]
== Get Application Telemetry Status

> The following method gets the current status of application telemetry for the cluster.

Reviewer 2: > I think you misread my comment here. I meant that "state" sounds like a status, not that that is a better way of referring to it. Settings are definitely not a "status" or a "state" in my mind

Reposting comment because I couldn't un-resolve the original comment, so this might have got missed

Author: OK, rewored to "The following method gets the current application telemetry settings the cluster."

NOTE: Application telemetry is off by default in Couchbase Server 8.0.
Future versions of Couchbase Server may enable it by default.

Couchbase Server reports the telemetry data it collects through the same Prometheus metrics endpoint it uses to publish its own metrics.
See xref:manage:monitor/set-up-prometheus-for-monitoring.adoc[] to learn how to set up Prometheus to collect metrics from your Couchbase Server cluster.

=== Prerequisites

You Couchbase Server cluster and your clients must meet the following requirements to use application telemetry:

* A Couchbase Server cluster only supports application telemetry when all of its nodes are running version 8.0 or later. 
Earlier versions of Couchbase Server do not support application telemetry.
Your cluster cannot collect application telemetry if it's running in mixed mode where some nodes are running a pre-8.0 version.
If you enable application telemetry on a mixed-mode cluster with pre-8.0 nodes, it does not advertise to clients that it can collect telemetry.

* Your applications must use an SDK that implements version 3.8 or later of the SDK API.

> See the table in xref:java-sdk:project-docs:compatibility.adoc#api-version[API Version] to determine which version of the SDK your application uses implements version 3.8 of the SDK API.

Reviewer: Do note that this is a link to Java, so the user will have to switch to their platform.  I don't know if you want to turn this into something like "see the table for your SDK.  For example, in java…"

@RichardSmedley may have a better way to approach this.

Reviewer 3: It's not easy, but I think that we do need to avoid telling customers about the SDK API version, which will only cause confusion.
Really, the only way to do this is linking every SDK, much like the rendered-on-a-single-line links at https://docs.couchbase.com/server/current/guides/creating-data.html#related-links
(in this case going straight to https://docs.couchbase.com/java-sdk/3.9/howtos/collecting-information-and-logging.html#sdk-telemetry-from-the-server etc., with an "and all later versions" at the end of the list, perhaps.)

Probably not the _only_ solution, so happy to discuss further.

Reviewer 3: tangential point: we want people using the latest version of the SDK,
so could just link to `current`, and say it's in "recent" versions.

Author: I prefer telling the reader exactly what the minimum version of the SDKs that they need  vs. simply saying "use the latest," I've extracted the SDK version numbers from the table I linked and listed them out with links to the SDKs.
